Gabriele Chiossi
CS 2650
Professor John Dolan
11/30/20

Freedom of Speech on the Internet in Europe

The Internet is a reality without borders and without rules lived as a place of expression free from any conditioning. Let us try to understand what freedom of expression on the Internet is. 
"Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers" declares article 19 of the Universal declaration of Human rights, considered by constitutional jurisprudence as the cornerstone of the democratic order as it expresses the development of the life of the country in its cultural, political and social aspect. Its role expands with the implementation of the freedom to give and disseminate news, opinions and comments, consequently the freedom of expression of thought does not only include freedom of opinion, but also the freedom of news which consists in the right to information .
This right must be understood here about both the freedom to express one's opinions and the freedom of information, that is, to inform and to be informed. Therefore, not only the use of speech and writing is taken into consideration, but also any other means of dissemination such as radio, television, cinema, audiovisual reproductions and, by extension, the internet.
Thanks to the network, the individual finds himself an active part of the information because not only does he find himself at the center of intense news flows but he himself has become the source of the same.
All democratic systems provide for freedom of expression and information, even most of these explicitly guarantee it. It follows that the freedom of expression on the internet is being expanded in such an unlimited way that a balance is also needed with other fundamental rights, such as the right to privacy, transparency of information sources and protection from cybercrime.
Many times, it happens that, although freedom of expression is guaranteed, there is in fact no real and effective access to public information, thus preventing citizens from fully exercising their democratic rights. Therefore, the existence of legislation in this regard is not enough if there are no clear national policies aimed at guaranteeing an adequate participation of the citizen in the life of the State.
The concept of pluralism , which in the liberal era played a central role in the process of forming public opinion, has been challenged by algorithms : these are used by search engines and internet service providers to create a hierarchy of contents that can be viewed by the user through filters that aim to intercept their particular preferences. Thus, social networks, and with them the uncontrollability of information flows organized with algorithmic techniques, seem to be on a collision course with the same principle of democracy, because information is only apparently widespread but in reality programmed from its origin.
Introducing a priori filters or blocks on a unilateral basis turns out to be an ineffective method, what could help, for the purposes of efficient internet management, is a self-regulation criterion, with its "bottom up" approach, rather than a regulation operated with the traditional "top down" approach. This new way of managing relationships and possible online disputes already finds some feedback, albeit with different intensities, in various countries and is stimulated by the increasingly widespread belief that a sort of self-restriction is carried out, above all to avoid legal disputes, and therefore a check is carried out before introducing illegal content or in any case likely to provoke reactions from other users, so as to create a preventive approach in this regard.
We have gone from a scheme in which there was a single issuer and multiple receivers of information, to one in which the issuers and receivers are multiple and in continuous dialogue with each other. Today anyone can activate sophisticated communication mechanisms with the increasingly simple use of social networks, so the manifestation of opinions acquires a permanent character by feeding itself and multiplying endlessly and becoming crucial for the creation of new ideas. Freedom of expression on the Internet is now a turning point in society. Ignoring or only partially recognizing this reality would be not only anachronistic, but above all harmful.
The question becomes even more complex about the hate speech phenomenon. The orientation of the ECHR tends towards the exceptional limitation of the freedom guaranteed by article 10 of the Convention with a prison sentence only " if other fundamental rights have been seriously violated, such as, for example, in the case of hate speech  or incitement to violence ".
However, it is difficult to identify an effective means of contrasting hate speech that does not contradict the need for protection of a fundamental freedom.
The fast transmission of hate messages is facilitated by the anonymity of the authors of the contents, by their permanence on the  web and by their ability to spread quickly in virtual platforms and environments different from those of the first publication. On the other hand, hatred, in its online version, does not change form compared to its traditional notion, but the internet has offered for the first time the possibility of creating messages and transmitting them without any effort, managing to bring them on a large scale.
With respect to the attitude to be taken to counteract the manifestations of hatred online , two opposing views face each other: The European approach, according to which the network should be regulated more strictly , to hinder the spread of discriminatory opinions and do not respect the principle of human dignity. The American approach, which instead maintains that regulating freedom of expression on the Internet would not serve this purpose but, on the contrary, would have the consequence of altering not only the system of protection of the freedom of expression of thought, but also commercial strategies of the major  players  in the digital economy.
In this paper we will particularly focus on the European approach since, in this class we cover a lot of what United States do. The ' hate speech is considered definitely a form of discrimination prohibited by Article 14 of the ECHR , European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, which stigmatize those discrimination "sex, race, colour, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, association with a national minority, property, birth or other status". In common experience, we can in fact say that hatred often arises from conditions of diversity, as listed in article 14 of the ECHR.
The same principle is protected, in the European context, by Article 21 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights. With the advent of technology and social networks, the control of this widespread phenomenon has become more complex as it openly clashes with the principle of freedom of expression on the Internet.
On May 31, 2016, to address the proliferation of racist and xenophobic hate speech online, the European Commission and four IT giants - Facebook, Microsoft, Twitter and YouTube with the subsequent joining of Instagram, Google+, Snapchat, Dailymotion and Jeuxvideo.com - presented a code of conduct to counter illegal hate speech online. We are talking about the “Code of Conduct to counter illegal hate speech online” (CoCEN) which is based on close cooperation between the European Commission, IT platforms, civil society organizations and national authorities. All stakeholders meet periodically under the protection of the High-Level Group on Combating Racism and Xenophobia to discuss difficulties to be addressed and progress made.
As the European Commission says the Commission's initiative produces positive results; 90% of the reported content was rated by the platforms within 24 hours, while the percentage recorded in 2016 was only 40%; in 2020, 71% of content deemed illicit hate speech was removed, compared to 28% in 2016; the average removal rate, similar to that recorded in previous evaluations, shows that platforms continue to respect freedom of expression and avoid removing content that is not necessarily classifiable as illegal hate speech; the platforms responded and provided feedback to 67.1% of the reports received. This is a higher percentage than in the previous monitoring exercise (65.4%).
As future projects, the Commission will examine possible ways to induce all platforms dealing with illicit hate speech to set up effective notification and intervention systems. YouTube, like many other big names in the digital sector, has set several limits to freedom of expression on the Internet. The rules are constantly updated in relation to the need to avoid the dissemination of videos that advocate hatred, supremacy, and violent extremism. In a public post, YouTube explained that the new rules  "specifically prohibit videos that claim the superiority of a group to justify discrimination, segregation or exclusion based on age, sex, race, caste, religion, sexual orientation."
For some years now, Facebook has activated a feature that allows each user to ban, hide, specific words or phrases, but also emojis, from the comments on their wall, where they are considered offensive.
Recently the pandemic has unleashed the web which has become the main diffuser of distorted information. This is why Facebook has decided to enhance its services to combat fake news on Coronavirus, removing from the platform all groups and events that urge people not to respect the social distancing imposed around the world to reduce the risk of spreading Covid-19.
According to data provided by Facebook, "hundreds of thousands" of posts were deleted. It is not just about censorship but also the possibility of giving correct information and creating informed opinions. In fact, we see that anyone who has interacted with this type of content has received a notice on their bulletin board with a link to the WHO site, in particular to the section called "Myth busters", in which the coronavirus hoaxes are dismantled one by one. In this way Facebook tends to raise awareness among users, helping them to become themselves hunters of false news within their own circle, chats, groups.
The problems concerning freedom of expression on the Internet that have just been highlighted show the need to prepare forms of regulation of the flow of information through the new means of communication.
Sometimes, we come across mechanisms which, under the pretext of protecting certain rights, give rise to real forms of "censorship" and limit freedom of expression in an unacceptable way. It is therefore difficult to balance the different interests and the contextual rights by giving them a specific regulation.
Until now, the Internet has been pure anarchy: since its birth, in fact, it has been a transnational and supranational space, within everyone's reach, in any place in the world where everyone could say and do what they wanted. Initially the fact that there were few rules allowed the Internet to grow into what it is: a huge opportunity. However, this extensive expansion has highlighted a series of critical issues that can only be overcome with the creation of global rules. It is important that these rules strike the right balance between freedom of expression and protection of security and that they are also suitable for the area they are regulating. The peculiarity of the Internet requires different controls than those prescribed for other mass media. There is a need for rules, suitable for the medium but necessary.

Sources
“Press Corner.” European Commission - European Commission, ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_1134. 
“Universal Declaration of Human Rights.” United Nations, United Nations, www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/. 
“Article 14: Protection from Discrimination.” Article 14: Protection from Discrimination | Equality and Human Rights Commission, www.equalityhumanrights.com/en/human-rights-act/article-14-protection-discrimination. 




